Add ability for SpanProcessor to mutate spans on end (#4024)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/sdk.md

**Returns:** `Void`

> #### OnEnding

Reviewer: We'll want to call this out as experimental, and stabilize after some number of languages have implemented.
```suggestion
#### OnEnding

**Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md)
```

`OnEnding` is called just before a span is ended. The span is still mutable, but the end timestamp is already set.
This method MUST be called synchronously within the [`Span.End()` API](api.md#end),

> therefore it should not block or throw an exception.

Author: Do you want me to
 * spec out that `SpanProcessor`s are invoked in the order they are registered
 * or explicitly state that the order is implementation dependent and users need to be aware of that?
 
Also the same thing already applies to `OnStart`, therefore I'd add this to the `SpanProcessor` interface description instead of the method definitions. The only difference here for `OnEnding` is that users also need to be aware that the span might be concurrently modified because it has already escaped into the wild (e.g. into OpenTelemetry-Contexts).

> therefore it should not block or throw an exception.

Author: > The only difference here for OnEnding is that users also need to be aware that the span might be concurrently modified because it has already escaped into the wild (e.g. into OpenTelemetry-Contexts).

Should we maybe spec out that the SDK should prevent concurrent modifications here? E.g. the span might be modified by application code before or after `OnEnding` is invoked , but not during the invocation?

> therefore it should not block or throw an exception.

Reviewer: > spec out that SpanProcessors are invoked in the order they are registered

This.

> Also the same thing already applies to OnStart, therefore I'd add this to the SpanProcessor interface description instead of the method definitions.

Makes sense.

> Should we maybe spec out that the SDK should prevent concurrent modifications here? E.g. the span might be modified by application code before or after OnEnding is invoked , but not during the invocation?

Let's discuss this over in the [other thread](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4024/files#r1587399477).

**Returns:** `Void`

#### OnEnding

**Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md)

> `OnEnding` is called just before a span is ended. The span is still mutable, but the end timestamp is already set.

Reviewer 2: > The span is still mutable, but the end timestamp is already set.

While `OnEnding` executes, can the span still be mutated by application code (running in a different thread)?

Author: Yes, that would be the case. See also https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4024#discussion_r1587402818.

Reviewer: I think I disagree @JonasKunz. `OnEnding` should only be called once `Span.End()` is called. The [Span.End()](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#end) specification is ambiguous on whether calls to update a span are ignored after `Span.End()` is called, but in the java implementation we do ignore any subsequent updates.

When `Span.End()` is called, we should be able to:
- Atomically update the state of the span to ignore subsequent updates, whether those calls come from the thread that called `Span.End()` or another thread
- Synchronously call `SpanProcessor#onEnding()`, such that only SpanProcessors are the only thing which can update the span

Alternatively, we could flip the order, and say that when `Span.End()` is called:
- Synchronously call `SpanProcessor#onEnding()`, such that SpanProcessors and any other threads with access to the span can concurrently mutate the span
- After calling all `SpanProcessor#onEnding()`, atomically update the state of the span to ignore subsequent updates

Author: > When Span.End() is called, we should be able to:

> * Atomically update the state of the span to ignore subsequent updates, whether those calls come from the thread that called Span.End() or another thread
> * Synchronously call SpanProcessor#onEnding(), such that only SpanProcessors are the only thing which can update the span

Agree, I think this is the best approach. It means `SpanProcessor` implementors don't need to worry about concurrent modifications and can be sure that the state seen by the last `SpanProcessor.onEnding` is the final state of the span.

Reviewer 3: I'm curious how you plan to implement this in Java.  Perhaps save the thread ID that finished the span and only allow that thread to mutate it during the `onEnding` execution with thread ID checks on each of the mutating methods?

Author: @tylerbenson sorry, I missed you comment. In this [comment](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4024#discussion_r1656642686) I gave an outline how to do it for I think any language based on locks. For the second approach in the comment a non-blocking check of whether a Thread is holding a lock is needed (like [Thread.holdsLock](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/Thread.html#holdsLock-java.lang.Object-). If that isn't available, I guess one could use your approach of storing the thread-id and checking against it instead of a secondary lock.

**Returns:** `Void`

> #### OnEnding

Reviewer 4: I think we should mark that this method as optional as the spec is already stable and existing SDKs may not want to immediately support this.

Author: What is the correct way of marking this as optional in the spec? Should I simply add ` (optional)` to the heading or is there a standard phrase to include here like for `Experimental`?

And I guess optional means I should add it to the spec-compliance-matrix too?

Author: @pellared friendly ping because my previous response might have gotten lost in the noise

**Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md)

> `OnEnding` is called just before a span is ended. The span is still mutable, but the end timestamp is already set.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`OnEnding` is called during the span `End()` operation, after the end timestamp has been set. The Span object is still mutable (i.e., `SetAttribute`, `AddLink`, `AddEvent` can be called) while `OnEnding` is called.
```

This method MUST be called synchronously within the [`Span.End()` API](api.md#end),
therefore it should not block or throw an exception.
If multiple `SpanProcessors` are registered, their `OnEnding` callbacks
are invoked in the order they have been registered.

> The SDK MUST guarantee that the span cannot be modified anymore by any other thread

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SDK MUST guarantee that the span can no longer be modified by any other thread
```

before invoking `OnEnding` of the first `SpanProcessor`. From that point on, modifications

> are only allowed synchronously from within the invoked `OnEnding` callbacks.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
are only allowed synchronously from within the invoked `OnEnding` callbacks.  All registered SpanProcessor `OnEnding` callbacks are executed before the first SpanProcessor's `OnEnd` callbacks are invoked.
```

**Returns:** `Void`

#### OnEnding

> **Status**: [Experimental](../document-status.md)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Status**: [Development](../document-status.md)
```

**Returns:** `Void`

#### OnEnding

**Status**: [Development](../document-status.md)

`OnEnding` is called during the span `End()` operation, after the end timestamp has been set. The Span object is still mutable (i.e., `SetAttribute`, `AddLink`, `AddEvent` can be called) while `OnEnding` is called.
This method MUST be called synchronously within the [`Span.End()` API](api.md#end),
therefore it should not block or throw an exception.
If multiple `SpanProcessors` are registered, their `OnEnding` callbacks
are invoked in the order they have been registered.
The SDK MUST guarantee that the span can no longer be modified by any other thread
before invoking `OnEnding` of the first `SpanProcessor`. From that point on, modifications

> are only allowed synchronously from within the invoked `OnEnding` callbacks.  All registered SpanProcessor `OnEnding` callbacks are executed before any SpanProcessor's `OnEnd` callback is invoked.

Reviewer 4: I am not sure how and SDK can provide such guarantee. It looks like more like a hint for the user.

Author: The typical pattern to implement this would be to simply hold the lock for modifications of the span while executing the `OnEnding` callbacks. After the those are finished, the span is set to an immutable state. So if anyone concurrently tries to modify the span, they will wait on the lock and afterwards fail the modification due to the span now being immutable.

If you want concurrent modification attempts to fail eagerly, you can instead mark the span as immutable before executing the `OnEndings`. While `OnEnding` callbacks are executed a second lock is held and mutation are still allowed when a thread is holding that second lock.

I'd expect all languages dealing with concurrency to also have mutexes/locks, so I don't see why any SDK shouldn't be able to provide this guarantee? Everything else is likely to make the `OnEnding` callbacks prone to race conditions.

Author: > Exception (this would be rather against the OTel spec policy to not throw exception at runtime)

I think this would also violate the API-spec, because API methods would suddenly start throwing exceptions.

For the other two options: Do you think that this is required to be part of the spec and should not just be left to the SDK implementors to decide whats best/idiomatic? I don't really see the benefit in specifying this

Reviewer 4: > Do you think that this is required to be part of the spec and should not just be left to the SDK implementors to decide whats best/idiomatic? I don't really see the benefit in specifying this

It makes implementors think on how to do notify about giving feedback to the caller rather than just doing no-op.

Example from the same document:

> There SHOULD be a message printed in the SDK's log to indicate to the user that an attribute, event, or link was discarded due to such a limit. To prevent excessive logging, the message MUST be printed at most once per span (i.e., not per discarded attribute, event, or link).

I also want to indicate that there are operations' definitions of [the Span interface](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#span-operations). Maybe we should update the definition of https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#updatename from

> Updates the Span name. 

To e.g.

> A `Span` MUST have the ability to update its name. 

PS. I feel like this is a confusing design and I need to think more about it before approving.

Reviewer 4: Besides, I think we should add a similar paragraph/sentences to `OnStart` to keep the symmetry.

Author: > Besides, we should add a similar paragraph/sentences/requirement to OnStart to keep the symmetry.

You mean that concurrent modifications are forbidden/prevented?
I don't feel like this is necessary, because when `OnStart` is called the Span hasn't escaped into the wild (e.g. `Context`s) yet and is not accessible by application code.
Yes, one could construct an example where a `SpanProcessor` performs some task asynchronously on a span it received via `OnStart`, but that feels too constructed/unrealistic imo to be spec worthy. That would be SDK-users trying to explicitly shoot themselves into the foot which I don't think is worth the effort to prevent.

On the other side for `OnEnding`, the span can have easily escaped to other threads via `Contexts` and it is easy to accidentally try to mutate it while being added (e.g. adding some attribute to the span in the current context). So here it is easy to shoot yourself into the foot as an user, which is something we want to prevent IMO.

Regarding the logging of span mutations being NoOp after end, I feel like if you want to specify it, [this location](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#span-operations) you linked would be the correct one, because it already has a statement about mutations not being allowed after the span has ended:
> With the exception of the function to retrieve the Span's SpanContext and IsRecording, none of the below may be called after the Span is finished.

But IMO this should be done in a separate PR like you said. And IMO it shouldn't block this one.

Reviewer 4: > Yes, one could construct an example where a SpanProcessor performs some task asynchronously on a span it received via OnStart, but that feels too constructed/unrealistic imo to be spec worthy. 

One can create a batch processor which starts the batching/processing during `OnStart`. ..

> the span can have easily escaped to other threads via `Contexts` 

This is language specific. E.g. in Go context is not a global - it is passed as value to all function. So for Go SDK it is equally complex to run into the same problem for `OnStart` and `OnEnding`. 

However,  I am not certain if this is not too restrictive and if this section is even needed:

Notice that we have already in the API specification here https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/trace/api.md#concurrency: 

> Span - All methods of Span are safe to be called concurrently.

```suggestion
All registered SpanProcessor `OnEnding` callbacks are executed before any SpanProcessor's `OnEnd` callback is invoked.
```

Reviewer 4: @jack-berg, @jmacd PTAL at my suggestion to make sure that you fine with it as you already approved the PR

Author: > > the span can have easily escaped to other threads via Contexts
>
> This is language specific. E.g. in Go context is not a global - it is passed as value to all function. So for Go SDK it is equally complex to run into the same problem for OnStart and OnEnding.

What I meant here is that to my understanding for any SDK implementation has no choice but to invoke `SpanProcessor.OnStart` synchronously during [Tracer span creation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/trace/api/#span-creation). However, the resulting Span is returned from this span creation method, meaning that when `SpanProcessor.OnStart` is executed, the span has not been returned yet to the the caller creating the span.

So the only way for the span to escape to be modified concurrently while any `SpanProcessor.OnStart` is running, would be to let it escape from a `SpanProcessor.OnStart` call. This is different from `SpanProcessor.OnEnding`, because there the Tracer-API caller has already received the created span and could have passed it to an asynchronous task in any way it likes (e.g. stored on the heap anywhere or passed on the stack).

Let's take a step back on why these restrictions have been proposed:

> The SDK MUST guarantee that the span can no longer be modified by any other thread
before invoking `OnEnding` of the first `SpanProcessor`. From that point on, modifications
are only allowed synchronously from within the invoked `OnEnding` callbacks.  All registered SpanProcessor `OnEnding` callbacks are executed before any SpanProcessor's `OnEnd` callback is invoked.

The goal is not to make the Span itself concurrency safe, which

> Span - All methods of Span are safe to be called concurrently.

already does.

The goal is to provide stronger guarantees to implementors of `SpanProcessor.OnEnding`:
As an implementor you know that you are the exclusive modifier of this span and no one can override your modifications (except for SpanProcessors running after you).

Without this guarantee, it is impossible to safely code something like this in `OnEnding`:
```
if (span.getAttribute(keyA) == ABC) {
   span.setAttribute(keyB, foobar)
}
```

This would be racey, because the span could be concurrently modified between the evaluation of the`if` condition and the evaluation of the block.

In addition, saying that spans cannot be modified after `OnEnding` guarantees that the last `SpanProcessor` has the last word: The modifications done by it will define the final state of the span.

These paragraphs were added as a result of [this discussion](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4024#discussion_r1594162897).

>> Yes, one could construct an example where a SpanProcessor performs some task asynchronously on a span it received via OnStart, but that feels too constructed/unrealistic imo to be spec worthy.

> One can create a batch processor which starts the batching/processing during OnStart. ..

But would that processor concurrently write the spans? I still fail to see a relevant enough use case for this. Like I said, this is just about the guarantees provided to `SpanProcessor` implementors, which are fine for `OnStart` as is imo.

Reviewer 4: > So the only way for the span to escape to be modified concurrently while any SpanProcessor.OnStart is running, would be to let it escape from a SpanProcessor.OnStart call.

Yes. If it is possible and if we are concerned about it then we should add the same restrictions in `OnStart`.

Author: > Yes. If it is possible and if we are concerned about it then we should add the same restrictions in OnStart.

I personally think it an edge case here not important enough. What we could do is state that for `OnStart` processors must not concurrently modify the spans. So impose a restriction on implementors, which however is not enforced through any code in the SDK. More like don't do this, or bad things may happen.

> At this point, I would rather add a general guideline that the processors should not modify the spans asynchronously to avoid race conditions and indeterministic behavior.

For `OnStart`, I agree to go this route (like stated in my paragraph above) if we deem it important enough. For `OnEnding`, this doesn't solve the problem of concurrent modifications performed by application code and not SpanProcessors (which is impossible for `OnStart`).

> Moreover, I am concerned that such restrictions on SDK would produce additional computational overhead.

I'm trying to understand what computational overhead you are thinking of: Isn't locking already involved anyway to make spans concurrency safe, so this shouldn't impose additional cost?

Author: > Changing a span asynchronously is also rather something very uncommon.

I personally don't agree with that statement. Getting the current span (from the context) and adding an attribute to it or changing the name doesn't seem to uncommon to me. And the current span might have been started and ended on another thread. I think this shouldn't be to uncommen in go too, because you could easily pass the current context/span to a goroutine, right?

Reviewer 4: > concurrent modifications performed by application code

Is not an edge case as well? I never saw any application or instrumentation library doing asynchronous span modification that could run in parallel while ending a span.

> Isn't locking already involved anyway to make spans concurrency safe, so this shouldn't impose additional cost?

It would be a more complex locking logic. I guess the overhead would be minimal, but never sure before you measure it.

Author: >> concurrent modifications performed by application code
>>
> Is not an edge case as well? I never saw any application or instrumentation library doing asynchronous span modification that could run concurrently while ending a span.

Looks like we commented at the same time, I think I answered that in [my previous comment](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4024#discussion_r1657194063)

> Getting the current span (from the context) and adding an attribute to it or changing the name doesn't seem too uncommon to me. And the current span might have been started and ended on another thread. I think this shouldn't be to uncommen in go too, because you could easily pass the current context/span to a goroutine, right?

At least in Java it is very common that the current context (and therefore current span) is passed around to different threads / asynchronous tasks.
